Add list to map processor (#3806)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _data-prepper/pipelines/configuration/processors/list-to-map.md

---
layout: default
title: List to map processor
parent: Processors
grand_parent: Pipelines
nav_order: 55
---

# list_to_map

> The `list-to-map` processor converts a list of objects from an event where each object contains a `key` field, into a map of target keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `list-to-map` processor converts a list of objects from an event, where each object contains a `key` field, into a map of target keys.
```

## Configuration

> The following table describes the configuration options to generate target keys to object mappings:

Reviewer: This language seems to disagree with the processor description above. (i.e., converts a list of objects into a map of keys).
Since the process is described above, can you generally describe what the options do for you like so?
```suggestion
The following table describes the configuration options used to generate target keys for the mappings:
```

Option | Required | Type | Description
:--- | :--- | :--- | :---
`key` | Yes | String | The key of the fields to be extracted as keys in the generated mappings

> `source` | Yes | String | The list of objects with `key` fields that be converted to keys based on the generated mappings.

Reviewer 2: This might be better since the `key` fields will be used as keys in the generated map. They are not dependent or based on the map.
```suggestion
`source` | Yes | String | The list of objects with `key` fields that will be converted to keys in the generated mappings.
```

> `target` | No | String | The target for the generated map. When not specified, the generated map will be placed in the root directory.

Reviewer 2: Node is more accurate here as we are talking about a JSON object.
```suggestion
`target` | No | String | The target for the generated map. When not specified, the generated map will be placed in the root node.
```

`value_key` | No | String | When specified, values given a `value_key` in objects contained in the source list will be extracted and converted into the value specified by this option based on the generated map. When not specified, objects contained in the source list retain their original value when mapped.
`flatten` | No | Boolean | When `true`, values in the generated map output flatten into single items based on the `flattened_element`. Otherwise, objects mapped to values from the generated map appear as lists.
`flattened_element` | Conditionally | String | The element to keep, either `first` or `last`, when `flatten` is set to `true`.

## Usage

> To use the `list_to_map` processor, create a `.log` file to create a list of source objects with values. The following example creates a file named `logs_json.log`.  Because the `source` parameter reads each line in the `.log` file as an event, the object list appears as one line even though it contains three objects.

Reviewer 2: This may help avoid the confusion between the file source and the `source` parameter in the list-to-map processor.

Also, there are 4 objects in the list, rather than 3. 

```suggestion
To use the `list_to_map` processor, create a `.log` file to create a list of source objects with values. The following example creates a file named `logs_json.log`.  Because the `file` source reads each line in the `.log` file as an event, the object list appears as one line even though it contains three objects.
```

Author: I'll switch this to "multiple" objects.

```json
{"mylist":[{"name":"a","value":"val-a"},{"name":"b","value":"val-b1"},{"name":"b","value":"val-b2"},{"name":"c","value":"val-c"}]}
```
{% include copy.html %}

> Next, create a `pipeline.yaml` that uses `logs_json.log` as `source` by pointing to the log files correct path.  

Reviewer 2: Nit:
```suggestion
Next, create a `pipeline.yaml` that uses `logs_json.log` as `source` by pointing to the log file's correct path.  
```

    "name": "a",
    "value": "val-a"
  },
  "b": {
    "name": "b",
    "value": "val-b1"
  },
  "c": {
    "name": "c",
    "value": "val-c"
  }
}
```

### Example: `flattened_element` set to `last`

The following example `pipeline.yaml` sets the `flattened_element` to last, therefore flattening the processor output based on each values last element. 

```yaml
pipeline:
  source:
    file:
      path: "/full/path/to/logs_json.log"
      record_type: "event"
      format: "json"
  processor:
    - list_to_map:
        key: "name"
        source: "mylist"
        target: "mymap"
        value_key: "value"
        flatten: true
        flattened_element: "last"
  sink:
    - stdout:
```
{% include copy.html %}

The processor maps object `b` to value `val-b2`, since `val-b2` is the last element in object `b`, as shown in the following output:

```json
{
  "mylist": [
    {
      "name": "a",
      "value": "val-a"
    },
    {
      "name": "b",
      "value": "val-b1"
    },
    {
      "name": "b",
      "value": "val-b2"
    },
    {
      "name": "c",
      "value": "val-c"
    }
  ],
  "a": "val-a",
  "b": "val-b2",
  "c": "val-c"
}
```

### Example: `flatten` set to false

> The following example `pipeline.yaml` sets `flatten` to `false`, causing the processor to out values from the generated map as a list. 

Reviewer: "... causing the processor to output values from ..."
Is this change correct (output)?

Author: ```suggestion
The following example `pipeline.yaml` sets `flatten` to `false`, causing the processor to output values from the generated map as a list. 
```

---
layout: default

> title: List to map processor

Reviewer 3: Also, per #3666 I think we should use the actual processor name.

> title: List to map processor

Author: We have a discussion about the title standard going in #3666. Fixed the consistency on the page, but leaving the title the same for now to address once we come to a decision on the title convention.

parent: Processors
grand_parent: Pipelines
nav_order: 55
---

# list_to_map

> The `list-to-map` processor converts a list of objects from an event, where each object contains a `key` field, into a map of target keys.

Reviewer 3: `list_to_map` -> Use hyphens.

> The `list-to-map` processor converts a list of objects from an event, where each object contains a `key` field, into a map of target keys.

Author: ```suggestion
The `list_to_map` processor converts a list of objects from an event, where each object contains a `key` field, into a map of target keys.
```

`value_key` | No | String | When specified, values given a `value_key` in objects contained in the source list will be extracted and converted into the value specified by this option based on the generated map. When not specified, objects contained in the source list retain their original value when mapped.
`flatten` | No | Boolean | When `true`, values in the generated map output flatten into single items based on the `flattened_element`. Otherwise, objects mapped to values from the generated map appear as lists.
`flattened_element` | Conditionally | String | The element to keep, either `first` or `last`, when `flatten` is set to `true`.

## Usage

If you want to test the usage of the `list_to_map` processor before using the processor on your own source, use the following example. 

Create a source file named `logs_json.log`.  Because the `file` source reads each line in the `.log` file as an event, the object list appears as one line even though it contains multiple objects.

```json
{"mylist":[{"name":"a","value":"val-a"},{"name":"b","value":"val-b1"},{"name":"b",  "value":"val-b2"},{"name":"c","value":"val-c"}]}
```
{% include copy.html %}

> Next, create a `pipeline.yaml` that uses the `logs_json.log` file as `source` by pointing to the `.log` file's correct path.  

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Next, create a `pipeline.yaml` file that uses the `logs_json.log` file as the `source` by pointing to the `.log` file's correct path:  
```

```yaml
pipeline:
  source:
    file:
      path: "/full/path/to/logs_json.log"
      record_type: "event"
      format: "json"
  processor:
    - list_to_map:
        key: "name"
        source: "mylist"
        value_key: "value"
        flatten: true
  sink:
    - stdout:
```
{% include copy.html %}

> Run the pipeline. If successful, the processor returns the generated map with objects mapped according to their `value_key`. Similar to the original source, which contains one line and therefore one event, the processors returns the following JSON as one line. For readability, the following example and all proceeding JSON example have been adjusted to multiple lines.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Run the pipeline. If successful, the processor returns the generated map with objects mapped according to their `value_key`. Similar to the original source, which contains one line and therefore one event, the processor returns the following JSON as one line. For readability, the following example and all subsequent JSON examples have been adjusted to span multiple lines:
```

```json
{
  "mylist": [
    {
      "name": "a",
      "value": "val-a"
    },
    {
      "name": "b",
      "value": "val-b1"
    },
    {
      "name": "b",
      "value": "val-b2"
    },
    {
      "name": "c",
      "value": "val-c"
    }
  ],
  "a": "val-a",
  "b": "val-b1",
  "c": "val-c"
}
```

### Example: Maps set to `target`

The following example `pipeline.yaml` shows the `list_to_map` processor when set to a specified target, `mymap`.

```yaml
pipeline:
  source:
    file:
      path: "/full/path/to/logs_json.log"
      record_type: "event"
      format: "json"
  processor:
    - list_to_map:
        key: "name"
        source: "mylist"
        target: "mymap"
        value_key: "value"
        flatten: true
  sink:
    - stdout:
```
{% include copy.html %}

> The generated map appears under the target key.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The generated map appears under the target key:
```

```json
{
  "mylist": [
    {
      "name": "a",
      "value": "val-a"
    },
    {
      "name": "b",
      "value": "val-b1"
    },
    {
      "name": "b",
      "value": "val-b2"
    },
    {
      "name": "c",
      "value": "val-c"
    }
  ],
  "mymap": {
    "a": "val-a",
    "b": "val-b1",
    "c": "val-c"
  }
}
```

### Example: No `value_key` specified

> The follow example `pipeline.yaml` shows the `list_to_map` processor with no `value_key` specified. Since `key` is set to the objects `name`, the processor extracts the names of each object to use as keys in the map. 

Reviewer 4: Use _since_ only to describe time events. Don’t use in place of _because_.

```yaml
pipeline:
  source:
    file:
      path: "/full/path/to/logs_json.log"
      record_type: "event"
      format: "json"
  processor:
    - list_to_map:
        key: "name"
        source: "mylist"
        flatten: true
  sink:
    - stdout:
```
{% include copy.html %}

The values from the generated map appear as original objects from the `.log` source as shown in the following example response:

```json
{
  "mylist": [
    {
      "name": "a",
      "value": "val-a"
    },
    {
      "name": "b",
      "value": "val-b1"
    },
    {
      "name": "b",
      "value": "val-b2"
    },
    {
      "name": "c",
      "value": "val-c"
    }
  ],
  "a": {
    "name": "a",
    "value": "val-a"
  },
  "b": {
    "name": "b",
    "value": "val-b1"
  },
  "c": {
    "name": "c",
    "value": "val-c"
  }
}
```

### Example: `flattened_element` set to `last`

> The following example `pipeline.yaml` sets the `flattened_element` to last, therefore flattening the processor output based on each value's last element. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following example `pipeline.yaml` file sets the `flattened_element` to last, therefore flattening the processor output based on each value's last element: 
```

```yaml
pipeline:
  source:
    file:
      path: "/full/path/to/logs_json.log"
      record_type: "event"
      format: "json"
  processor:
    - list_to_map:
        key: "name"
        source: "mylist"
        target: "mymap"
        value_key: "value"
        flatten: true
        flattened_element: "last"
  sink:
    - stdout:
```
{% include copy.html %}

> The processor maps object `b` to value `val-b2`, since `val-b2` is the last element in object `b`, as shown in the following output:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The processor maps object `b` to value `val-b2` because `val-b2` is the last element in object `b`, as shown in the following output:
```

Author: Another instance of since here. I'll add that to my notes of what to watch our for :)

```json
{
  "mylist": [
    {
      "name": "a",
      "value": "val-a"
    },
    {
      "name": "b",
      "value": "val-b1"
    },
    {
      "name": "b",
      "value": "val-b2"
    },
    {
      "name": "c",
      "value": "val-c"
    }
  ],
  "a": "val-a",
  "b": "val-b2",
  "c": "val-c"
}
```

### Example: `flatten` set to false

> The following example `pipeline.yaml` sets `flatten` to `false`, causing the processor to output values from the generated map as a list. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The following example `pipeline.yaml` file sets `flatten` to `false`, causing the processor to output values from the generated map as a list: 
```
